http://www.exe-kiteboarders.co.uk/Locations.html

https://web.archive.org/web/20161013065125/http://www.exe-kiteboarders.co.uk/Locations.html

The Duck Pond and the Seafront - Places to Kite and Windsurf around Exmouth
The Duck Pond and the Seafront Exmouth is a great place to learn kitesurfing, we benefit from good prevailing winds and two locations each suited to various levels of kiteboarding expertise.

The Duck Pond
Map of Duckpond

Best Direction - N, NW.  Get out early, about 3 hours before high tide, so you can set up on the sand.  Also workable on a W, or SW although can be gusty.  NE comes across land.

 

 

The Duck Pond is ideal for beginners because it's unlikely that you'll go out of your depth (Make sure there's enough water to break your fall though).

The Duck PonArea bannedd also benefits from fewer tourists in the Summer but there's still a lot you need to know so take a look at the guidelines.

For those kiting on Exmouth Duckpond, check the map for the area in which kiting is banned during October, November and December. Note, this is a voluntary ban. We need to ensure everyone sticks to it so that is does not become an official (and perhaps) total ban.

You can find more information on the reason for the ban here. Even if you do not care about the wildlife on the Exe, read the last paragraph. It explains very clearly, just how easy it would be to get a TOTAL BAN on kitesurfing on Duck Ponds.

Exmouth Seafront
Seafront map

Best Direction - Anything with South in.  S (onshore), SE/SW (cross on).  Also works on E and W (cross shore).  Get out ideally when the sandbar starts to show 2 - 3 hours before low tide.


Exmouth seafront is suited to more advanced kiteboarders. The tide is fast and strong (Around 7 knots) and in peak season, there's a lot of traffic on the water from windsurfers, jetskiers and petrol-heads to trawlers and luxury yachts. Make sure you read these guidelines below even if you think you know the area well.

Exmouth Seafront Guidelines
The main navigation channel runs very near the beach. Please stay well clear of all vessels.
Retreat to a safe area outside the navigation channel to allow approaching vessels to pass.
Learn and abide by maritime right of way rules.
Stay well clear of bathing areas when in use.
Do not practice on the beach.
Do not launch or land in crowded areas.
Disable kites when not in use.
Except when launching and landing, do not fly your kite over the beach, either when on the beach or when sailing.
Currents are very strong here. Seek advice from local kitesurfers. The seafront is not for beginners.
Use a kite-leash and safety system and ensure they work properly. Do not cross the road flying your kite.
Read the local code of conduct.
3rd party insurance is very strongly recommended.
If in doubt, Don't go out



===============

http://www.exe-kiteboarders.co.uk/Locations/duckponds-exclusion-zone.html

Duckponds Exclusion Zone
As the adopted name for the area implies, The Duckpond is a very important place for waterfowl in the winter months. The river Exe supports internationally significant numbers of ducks and geese in winter, numbering up to 25,000 individuals at the peak of the season. The Exe is also the winter home to 1,000 dark-bellied brent geese, 1% of the entire world’s population of these little geese.Dark-bellied Brent Goose
The birds flock to the lower end of the Exe Estuary at the beginning of winter to feed on the large eelgrass beds which grow there. This is the most nutritious food for the geese and important for them in replacing calories lost in their massive migration from Siberian Russia. They feed in this area between September and December by which time they have eaten pretty much all of the available eel grass and move on to grazing areas adjacent to the estuary. They can only feed effectively on eel grass when it is suspended in shallow water, and so feed on the plant as the tide is coming in and going out, resting on the water in the intervening period.

A single disruption event may seem harmless, and to some extent it is, however it is the combined effect of repeated flushing of roosting birds which can have a catastrophic effect on them. In cold winters, with repeated disturbance, it has been known for entire flocks of birds to die within a window of a very few hours. The problem is that they appear healthy and unaffected until the very last minute - and when energy levels in the birds fall below a critical level, they appear to die spontaneously.

It is our duty as residents or users of the site to ensure that these globally important populations of birds leave our shores as healthy as they arrived and, to do this, it has been identified that repeated disturbance is an avoidable problem. It is shown that kites and flocks of birds can co-exist happily on the water, as long as adequate distance is kept between humans and birds. This is the reason for not implementing a total ban on the estuary.

However, if it becomes clear that a voluntarily observed code of conduct is not feasible for this section of the river, then it will be a simple matter to ban this deleterious activity completely, as the estuary is covered by many national and international conservation designations which allow this to happen. It is hoped that we can work co-operatively to enforce the voluntary ban, but this will only work with observance by kitesurfers and other watersports users, and effort amongst the kiteing community to self-regulate.

Many thanks to Chewie and James Chubb (of the RSPB?) for this information